JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
health care in critical
condition, Republicans forced to
delay a vote on replacing
Obamacare, putting final
passage in further jeopardy.
Then: dangerous work --
the perils of shipbuilding,
as the U.S. Navy plans
to expand its fleet.
JOEY PETTEY, Accident Survivor:
The explosion, when it happened,
it blew doors and hatches
and electrical panels,
boom, boom, boom.
When that third one
hit, it blew it out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
it's Politics Monday.
Amy Walter and Tamara Keith are
here to talk the high stakes
of health care, and what new
polls on the Trump
presidency suggest.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Russia
is stepping up pressure
on the United States to
regain two diplomatic
compounds seized in
New York and Maryland.
President Obama ordered them
seized in December in response
to Russian meddling in the 2016
election.
Today, Foreign Minister Sergei
Lavrov called it highway
robbery, and his deputy held a
high-level meeting at
the State Department.
Nick Schifrin has been
following the story, and he
joins me now in the studio.
So, Nick, why are the
Russians so interested
in these two compounds?
NICK SCHIFRIN: What officials
on both sides are talking
about is bilateral irritants.
So these are the compounds.
These are the Russian diplomats
who were expelled last year as
part of the U.S. response to
the Russian hacking, and these
are not the major issues.
These are not Syria and Ukraine.
And the idea is that the fewer
issues you talk about, the
more likely it is you make
at least a little progress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what are
the prospects that they can
reach any kind of agreement?
NICK SCHIFRIN: That's exactly
what the Trump administration
is trying to find, any kind
of agreement.
There are huge headwinds,
as you know, politically
in this country if you
give back those compounds.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Huge.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And
so -- huge, exactly.
But U.S. officials are
worried about retribution.
Russia says, look, if there's no
deal today in the near future,
three dozen of your diplomats
will be expelled and life
for your diplomats in
Russia will get even worse.
And we have already seen
a campaign of intimidation
against U.S. diplomats.
In Russia in June 2016, we
saw a U.S. diplomat outside
of the embassy get beaten up.
That's not something the
U.S. wants to see there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, quickly,
where do you see this going?
NICK SCHIFRIN: It's a
chicken and egg problem.
The U.S. says, you
hacked, we responded.
If Russia were to say, no,
no, no, we didn't hack, you
kicked our guys out, you seized
our compounds for no reason,
then we retaliate, the U.S. has
to say, oh, well, this is a new
retaliation, and yet
another response.
There's no telling
where that would end.
The U.S. is trying to say, look,
the big issues, keep that aside.
Maybe we can make some progress
and at least, I don't know,
save a bad relationship from
getting worse.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another aspect
of the U.S.-Russia relationship.
Nick Schifrin, thank you.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Officials at
Princeton University insisted
that a Chinese-American
graduate student jailed
in Iran is innocent.
Iranian courts announced
on Sunday that Xiyue
Wang was sentenced to
10 years in prison for
spying.
He was arrested last August.
Princeton says that Wang
was conducting research
for his doctorate.
Separately, Iran announced
that President Hassan Rouhani's
brother has been arrested
on allegations of
financial misconduct.
In Jordan, a soldier
was sentenced today to
life in prison at hard
labor for killing three
U.S. Army Green Berets.
He said he fired on the
military trainers last November
because he thought his base
was under attack.
After the sentencing
today, relatives of the
Americans condemned the
sentence, which could
let the killer go
free in 20 years.
JAMES MORIARTY, Father of Slain
Soldier: He gets out -- the
day he gets out, my daughters
will serve another 30
years after that without
the love of their brother,
and that's outrageous.
I would kill him myself if
I had the ability to do so,
and I wish they had hung him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The families
were shown security camera
footage of the attack.
They say that it shows
the Jordanian soldier
firing for six minutes,
even after the Americans
had identified themselves.
The United Nations reports
that the war in Afghanistan
is killing more civilians than
ever.
A new report says more than
1,600 died in the first half
of this year, and some 3,500
others were wounded.
It also says that deaths and
injuries from Taliban suicide
bombings rose by 15 percent.
The Taliban dismissed the
report as propaganda material.
The United Arab Emirates flatly
denied today that it hacked
into Qatar's state news agency
Web sites in May, and
planted false stories.
Four Arab countries severed
ties with Qatar after its emir
was falsely quoted as praising
Hamas and Iran.
The Washington Post reported
the hack, but, in London today,
the UAE's foreign minister
pushed back.
ANWAR MOHAMMED QARQASH, UAE
Foreign Minister: Our embassy in
Washington has put these denials
in place, and I think this is
a crisis and There IS is a lot
of rumors And a lot of false
news and stories.
And this is going to die out.
It is not true.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The FBI
is working with Qatar to
investigate the incident.
Authorities in Arizona searched
again today for one person
still missing after a flash
flood killed nine
people on Saturday.
Cell phone video captured the
deluge as it swept through
Tonto National Forest, 100 miles
northeast of Phoenix.
The water at the swimming
site rose as high as
six feet, triggered by
a heavy thunderstorm.
All of the dead, including
five children, were part
of an extended family.
The Trump administration says
it will let an extra 15,000
foreign workers into the country
this budget year on
temporary seasonal visas.
Homeland Security Secretary
John Kelly calls it
a one-time extension.
The announcement came today
as the president promoted Made
in America Week, showcasing
domestically made goods.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost
eight points to close at 21629.
The Nasdaq rose about
two points, and the S&P
500 gave up a fraction.
And a video of a young model
wearing a miniskirt is causing
an uproar in deeply conservative
Saudi Arabia.
A video over the weekend
showed her walking around a
historic site north of Riyadh.
State media reports that
she could face legal action.
The country's dress code
for women mandates long,
loose-fitting robes.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the Republican health care
bill in limbo -- we break down
some of the sticking points;
inside the Iraqi city of Mosul
liberated from ISIS, but left
in ruins; Ivanka Trump's record
on making fashion products
overseas; and much more.
Even as Senate Majority Leader
Mitch McConnell has moved to
delay a vote on a Republican
health care plan, there's
no letup in the battle
behind the scenes.
Lawmakers, governors,
interest groups are
all working furiously.
A handful of key questions
may decide the bill's fate.
Among them, how many fewer
people would be covered?
And will cheaper insurance make
it more appealing or would it
be too skimpy for too many?
Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel
is one of the original
architects behind Obamacare.
He's the author of the new book
"Prescription for the Future."
And Avik Roy is co-founder and
president of the Foundation for
Research on Equal Opportunity.
It's a think tank
based in Austin, Texas.
He's been a health
adviser to Republican
presidential candidates,
including Mitt Romney.
And we welcome both
of you to the program.
Avik Roy, let me start with you.
We don't have an analysis of
this Senate bill, this new
Senate bill by the Congressional
Budget Office, but there
was an analysis done by the
health care firm Avalere.
It is forecasting that this bill
would lead to federal Medicaid
funding reductions ranging
from 29 to 37 percent
in all 50 states.
Doesn't that make it
understandable why even
Republicans are still
struggling to support
this bill?
AVIK ROY, Foundation for
Research on Equal Opportunity:
Well, Judy, there's a bit of
misunderstanding as to exactly
what the source of those
changes to Medicaid are.
There are really two
major components.
There is the first, which is the
repeal of Obamacare's expansion
of the Medicaid program,
which is replaced by a robust
system of tax credits for those
individuals, those enrollees
to buy private coverage.
So that's about 85 to
95 percent of the money
that you're describing.
Then there's a small component,
which is per capita reforms,
a Bill Clinton proposal from
1994, to make the long-term
Medicaid program more
fiscally sustainable.
And that's the piece that really
matters to those governors,
particularly in states that
didn't expand Medicaid, because
that's going to be a pretty
gradual, but important reform
to make the Medicaid program
fiscally sustainable.
So the first piece, the big
piece, replaced by tax credits
to afford coverage for those
individuals, and the second
piece for the legacy program
a very gradual and sensible
and bipartisan approach
to Medicaid reform.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, just so that
I understand, you're saying that
these cuts are not as draconian
as they sound?
AVIK ROY: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Dr. Zeke Emanuel?
DR.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL, Former White
House Special Adviser: I don't
know, when you cut $170 billion
out of a program over 10
years, and when the CBO says 15
million people are going to lose
Medicaid program.
And let's remember those
who 15 million people are.
They're the working poor.
They're able-bodied people
who are generally working --
two-thirds to three-quarters of
them work at jobs.
It's just their employers
don't provide insurance.
Avik says, well, we're going
to give them a subsidy.
Remember, the subsidies are
less than the subsidies that
the Obamacare proposal gives,
and they go to a much,
much smaller level.
The insurance they
cover is much less.
It is not comparable.
You can't cut $770
billion and say, oh,
it's not going to affect
anything; 22 million people
are going to lose coverage
because of this bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Avik Roy,
how do you answer that?
AVIK ROY: Yes, so the CBO
estimate, this 22 million number
that Zeke is talking about
is largely driven by erroneous
aspects of the Congressional
Budget Office's methodology.
The CBO believes that 15 million
people will drop out of the
insurance market in 2018 because
they will no longer face a fine
for not purchasing coverage, the
individual mandate that we all
hear so much about.
And, ultimately, about 18
million of that 22 million is
driven by the lack of a fine
forcing people to have
coverage, so it's not
driven by a lack of funding.
There's robust funding.
(CROSSTALK)
DR.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: If you
don't like the message,
attack the messenger.
(CROSSTALK)
AVIK ROY: No, but this is
a fundamental problem with
the CBO's methodology.
And it's the reason why
Obamacare has an individual
mandate in the first place.
Senator Obama in 2008, he
opposed having an individual
mandate in his bill.
And it was only included because
the CBO told him that 16 million
-- the coverage, the statistic
of coverage would
be affected by that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
I don't want to spend
the whole time on the
CBO, the Congressional
Budget Office, but just
a quick response to that.
DR.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Well, again,
I think he's attacking the
messenger because he doesn't
like the message.
And the fact is that the CBO
is the independent arbiter.
Their methods aren't universal.
They don't get it
necessarily exactly right.
But you're not going to go
from 22 million uninsured down
to a more tolerable number.
It seems unconscionable that
senators could vote to throw 22
million people off of insurance.
And now we have the irony that
John McCain is delaying the
vote, a guy who needed surgery
that cost $30,000.
He certainly couldn't afford
it just out of nowhere.
Insurance has to pay.
And we're going to
get 22 million people
with less insurance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another aspect
of this, Avik Roy, is this --
in an effort to make insurance
more affordable, what we
now see is a Senate bill
offering alternatives
that lower premiums,
but they do this by cutting
back on the amount of
coverage, on what is covered.
You're creating -- the criticism
here is that you're creating
two markets, one for people
who can afford to continue to
get good medical care and those
who would be left out because
they can't.
How do you defend this
part of the legislation?
AVIK ROY: Well, Judy, I would
use -- I would challenge the
accuracy of the description
that you just gave
of the measure.
I think we're talking about
the Ted Cruz amendment to
the Senate health care bill.
And what that amendment is
trying to do is say, OK, sick
people are going to have much
more expensive coverage because
they consume more health care.
So, let's have direct taxpayer
subsidies in this regulated
market to ensure that they
can find affordable coverage.
But the fact, Judy, is that
tens of millions of Americans
who can't afford coverage can't
afford that coverage not because
they're sick, but because
they're healthy and insurance
costs too much.
And Obamacare over the last
four years has doubled or
tripled their premiums.
HHS, Health and Human Services,
researchers have estimated
that premiums have increased
for that population by
at least 100 percent
over the last four years.
So, what Ted Cruz is
trying to do is say
let's make sure there's
coverage that is affordable
for healthy people, as
well as for sick people.
And you do that by having a
market that really is focused on
covering people who are already
sick, which requires a
different kind of insurance,
and people who are
healthy and who need lower
premiums as a result.
DR.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Let's
make three quick points.
First of all, the subsidies that
the Republicans are going to
give are going to be much less
and smaller, driving up
what people have to pay, and
especially their deductible.
They don't do anything
about affordability
in this bill at all.
They don't change the
long-term trajectory of
health care costs one bit.
Second of all, the fact is
that every medical organization
has come out against this bill
and says it's going to
be bad for patients.
And the health insurance
industry says that what Avik Roy
just said is basically false.
You will segment the market.
You're going to take
healthy people, you're
going to separate them.
You're going to put the
sick people in a market,
and then you're going
to reduce the subsidies
you give them to buy insurance,
because the insurance is pegged
at a much skimpier package.
That is not a recipe for having
people have good insurance
and decreasing deductibles.
It's actually going to do
the exact reverse of what
the president pledged.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do
you want to respond?
AVIK ROY: Absolutely.
So, I would challenge a number
of things that Zeke said
there, as you would expect.
The first is that the chief
actuary of the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services,
who is an Obama appointee,
published a report a
couple of weeks ago
where he said, in fact,
that this bill would bend
down the cost curve and
reduce overall national
health expenditures
by making the health care
system more responsive
and more efficient.
And, actually, the tax credits
in the Senate health care bill
would expand to ensure that
those individuals who are sick,
who need robust coverage would
be able to afford the premiums
they have.
So, this bill will actually
provide hundreds of billions,
if not trillions of dollars over
the long term to ensure
that those people
can afford coverage.
DR.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: It's funny.
You're talking about giving
more money, when, in fact, the
bill is cutting back the money
it's putting into the
health care system.
You can't have it both ways.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One final
to you, Dr. Zeke Emanuel.
Many parts of the countries,
we know there are going to
be many counties where, under
the ACA, the Affordable
Care Act, there's
only one insurer left.
Prices have gone up.
A lot of people have been
priced out of the market.
DR.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this is
completely aside from what the
Republicans are trying to do.
DR.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Well,
it's not -- no, I would
disagree with there, Judy,
because the uncertainty
they have created in the market,
the Republicans - - Marco Rubio
removed the risk corridors
and the re-insurance proposal.
They have also created
uncertainty about whether
they are going to pay the
cost-sharing subsidies.
Those are subsidies to families
making less than $70,000
to pay their deductibles.
That actually
drives premiums up.
There are simple solutions.
You put the risk corridors in.
You give -- you guarantee
you are going to pay the
cost-sharing subsidies.
And you give insurance
companies a tax break.
You refund them the tax from
the Affordable Care Act if
they go into counties that have
one or fewer insurances.
That will actually stabilize
the insurance markets.
And states that run their
insurance exchanges,
like California and
Idaho, they actually are
running pretty well.
It's the federal side
that's not running so well.
And the federal side is run
by Mr. Trump's associates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
we're going to have to leave it
there, big subject, much to talk
about.
We are going to continue
to come back to it.
Zeke Emanuel, Avik
Roy, we thank you both.
DR.
EZEKIEL EMANUEL: Thank
you for having us.
AVIK ROY: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One week
ago, Iraqi Prime Minister
Haider al-Abadi proclaimed
victory over ISIS
in Mosul.
But reality on the
ground is different, as
the fight continues in
parts of the Old City
against ISIS holdouts.
As special correspondent
Marcia Biggs and videographer
Alessandro Pavone report, the
human toll of the fighting
is becoming apparent.
And it is horrific.
A warning: Many viewers may
find images and accounts
in this story disturbing.
MARCIA BIGGS: This is
what so-called liberated
Mosul looks and sounds
like, in a small pocket
of the Old City, the war
against ISIS seemingly ongoing.
And this is the Old City
from ground level, a scene
of utter devastation,
entire neighborhoods
flattened by coalition
airstrikes, leaving
the few survivors to
search for the remains
of their loved ones.
Bashar and Ali's families were
together in this house hit
by an airstrike 28 days ago.
Ali names the dead one by one.
ALI, Mosul Resident (through
translator): My mother, three
brothers, three sisters,
my father, two
sisters-in-law, two nieces.
MARCIA BIGGS: And you're the
only one left from your family.
ALI (through translator): Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: Shu Bedak Tamel,
what are you going to do now?
MAN (through translator):
What can I do?
I just want to take the
bodies out and bury them.
MARCIA BIGGS: Mosul is the
capital of Nineveh Province and
it is the men of Nineveh's civil
defense unit that are
responsible for pulling
the dead out of the rubble.
They arrive with their crude
tools, an ancient jackhammer,
a broken sledgehammer, and when
all else fails, they
use their hands.
One of the family members is
adamant that the family is
under this spot in a washroom.
"Just open the hole,"
this family member says.
But trying to drill through
over a foot of concrete proves
impossible and one of the
relatives finds another
way into the house.
So we enter the
ruins in the dark.
So this was the washroom
they were talking about.
He's saying there's
a baby inside.
In total, they are
looking for 18 bodies.
There were two families in the
adjoining houses that night.
Bashar lost six members of
his family, including his
wife and four children.
BASHAR, Mosul Resident (through
translator): We tried to
escape the day before, but ISIS
shot at us.
We ran back to the house and
the army told us, stay inside.
We will evacuate you when
we make the area safe.
But the next morning, the
airstrike hit our house.
There were two bombs.
MARCIA BIGGS: Were you
in the house when the
explosion happened?
BASHAR (through translator):
Yes, but I was near the
front door of this house.
I was the only one who
didn't get injured, along
with my neighbor's family.
And my youngest daughter
was rescued by the army.
She's still alive.
MARCIA BIGGS: The
remnants of life that
night are frozen in time.
Food sits uneaten on
the kitchen counter, but
the clock still runs.
Hours pass, then
finally a breakthrough.
It's a skull.
So they're telling me
they have no idea who
that little girl was.
There were six or seven little
girls in that room, and the
body is so decomposed, all there
is, is a skull.
The search for remains
lasts all day, with
relatives waiting nervously.
"God protect them,"
this one says.
They found four bodies
out of 18, 14 left to go.
The smell of death
is unbearable.
For the members of Mosul's civil
defense, it's an ordinary day.
The day before, they pulled
19 bodies from the rubble.
Rabih Mishaal Mohamed is a
sergeant with the unit, all of
whom are working without pay.
RABIH MISHAAL MOHAMED,
Sergeant (through translator):
The hardest part is when
you see a child under
the rubble because he is
innocent, he is a child.
He has nothing to do with
the army or ISIS or anyone.
MARCIA BIGGS: Why
do you do this?
RABIH MISHAAL MOHAMED (through
translator): It is very
difficult for us, but they are
like family, our brothers our
fathers, mothers, friends.
If we don't take their bodies
out, who will come and do that?
So we withstand it.
We have to withstand it.
MARCIA BIGGS: Withstand
it, they must.
It's a scene that will play
out again and again in the
days to come, a tiny sliver of
comfort to the families,
who are clinging to what
little they can find.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Marcia Biggs in the
Old City, West Mosul, Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the
White House, it is Made
in America Week, an effort
to highlight President
Trump's goal of boosting U.S.
manufacturing and job creation.
However, it has again
sparked questions over
Mr. Trump and his family's
businesses, particularly
where their products
are manufactured.
John Yang has the story.
JOHN YANG: Today, the White
House South Lawn was turned into
a showcase for products made
in each of the 50 states.
But not on display, merchandise
sold by the Trump Organization
or Ivanka Trump's fashion
line.
Most of those things
are made overseas.
Here to talk about how
Ivanka Trump's clothing
is made is Matea Gold
of The Washington Post.
She's part of a team of
reporters that investigated
the Ivanka Trump brand's
manufacturing practices.
Matea, thanks for joining us.
In your story, you said that
the Ivanka Trump fashion line
had retail sales of about $100
million last year.
What does she make, and
where does she make them?
MATEA GOLD, The Washington
Post: The Ivanka Trump brand,
which the first daughter still
owns, but doesn't control
on a day-to-day management,
makes clothes, handmade shoes
in an array of overseas
factories, we found exclusively,
in foreign factories.
We traced her current line
of products to five specific
countries, Bangladesh, China,
India, Indonesia, and Vietnam.
There's also customs records
that show that, back in 2013,
some of her shoes were made
in Ethiopia.
And the brand told us that,
while they would like to bring
manufacturing back to the United
States, they don't feel like
it's really possible to do
in a large-scale fashion.
JOHN YANG: And how
does this compare?
We should also note that
the Trump brand, the Trump
Organization brand products made
in about 12 different countries,
including Bangladesh and China.
How does this compare with
the rest of the industry?
MATEA GOLD: Well, the reality
is that the American apparel
industry is very firmly grounded
in globalization and
overseas production.
About 97 percent of the clothes
and shoes sold here in the
United States are made abroad.
And industry experts say that
it is going to be incredibly
difficult to reverse that
trend.
So, the focus in the
industry right now is not
on bringing manufacturing
back in a large-scale
fashion, but rather trying
to give consumers a sense of
confidence that their goods are
not being made by workers
overseas who are being
exploited for their labor.
JOHN YANG: And how does
the Ivanka Trump fashion
line measure up to the
rest of the industry
and that sort of thing in
policing labor conditions
at the factories they use?
MATEA GOLD: We found that the
Ivanka Trump brand lags behind
many in the apparel industry,
both large and small
companies, when it comes
to having oversight of
their foreign production.
Up to now, they have really
relied on their suppliers to
certify that they are complying
with their code of conduct, a
code of conduct, I should note,
that they would not publicly
disclose.
They are taking measures now
to do greater oversight, the
kind of measures that other
companies already have,
such as bringing in a
group to independently
audit factories and
to provide some programs on the
ground to support some of the
women who make their clothes.
JOHN YANG: And what did the
Trump people say to you?
Today, Sean Spicer was asked
today about some of this in the
White House briefing, and said
it would be inappropriate for
him to talk about a private
business at the White House
podium.
What did they tell you in
response to these things?
MATEA GOLD: Well, the president
of the Ivanka Trump brand,
Abigail Klem, told us that one
of the reasons they had not
taken these other measures that
other companies have is because
they're a newer and smaller
brand and that they're looking
now to really try to live
their mission of women who
work, which is the motto Ivanka
Trump developed at her company
throughout their
whole supply chain.
And that is something that they
said is evolving and they're
going to continue to strive to
do.
But Klem also told us that the
goal of bringing manufacturing
back to the United States for
their company was just
unrealistic, that there
aren't trained workers
that work in the apparel
industry here anymore, and,
in many cases, the machinery
doesn't even exist to do this
kind of production.
JOHN YANG: Matea, let me ask you
about something else you have
been reporting on for The Post.
The financial -- the campaign
spending records of the Trump
2020 campaign shows that they
paid money to -- they paid
fees to Donald Trump Jr.'s
lawyer before this latest story
broke about the meeting with the
Russian lawyer, and also they
reimbursed the Trump corporation
for legal consulting fees.
What's all this about?
MATEA GOLD: So, we don't have a
lot of answers from the campaign
committee, which has declined
to answer questions
about these payments.
But one thing we saw in the most
recent campaign finance filing
is that the legal fees paid
by the campaign committee
skyrocketed in the last quarter,
including a $50,000 retainer
paid to a criminal defense
attorney who is now
representing Donald Trump Jr.
This came in late June, before
President Trump himself said
he knew about this meeting in
which there were several
Russian or Russian-linked
people involved.
And it does raise questions
about whether this payment
specifically was connected to
the Russian probe.
And there was also this
reimbursement to the
Trump corporation for
legal fees, which is
the first time we have
seen Trump's own company
being reimbursed for
those kinds of service.
JOHN YANG: What does the
Federal Election Commission
say about campaign funds being
used for legal fees?
MATEA GOLD: The campaign
committees have a lot of leeway
to spend money on legal fees,
as long as the payments are
directly connected to activity
connected to the campaign.
So if the expenses wouldn't have
been incurred all but for the
campaign committee, they can
pay them.
But if they were expenses that
aren't related to political
activity, they're beyond the
purview of the committee.
The fact that these payments
were made through the reelection
committee suggests that they
are connected to some sort of
legal investigation or legal
work connected to the campaign.
JOHN YANG: Matea Gold on legal
fees being paid for by the
campaign and Ivanka Trump's
businesses, thank you very much.
MATEA GOLD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Capitol
Hill, Senate Republicans
continue their internal
fight over the health
care bill, as polls show
strong disapproval of
the Republican plan.
And polling in the past
week indicates historically
low approval for the
president at this point
in his first term.
Multiple polls have Mr. Trump's
approval in the 30s or at 40,
and his disapproval rating
in the 50s.
For all that, it's time for
Politics Monday with Tamara
Keith of NPR and Amy Walter of
The Cook Political Report.
So, it's time to talk
about polls again.
We don't do this every week.
We save it for
special occasions.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Amy,
seriously, there are a group of
new polls, three or four polls
out taken in the last week or
so, that do show some slippage
for the president in the
last few months, particularly
among independents.
There's a Washington Post poll
that shows, what, a six-point
slippage just since April.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Right, just among --
in general among independents.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
AMY WALTER: When we
first started talking
about the president
after his inauguration,
we said this is a president
who is starting with the lowest
approval rating of any president
that's been inaugurated.
Let's see where
he goes with this.
Instead of starting with a deep
reservoir of goodwill and a
honeymoon, which most presidents
start with, he started with
a deep -- he didn't have
that reservoir of good will.
Was be going to able
to fill up that well?
And the reality is, here we
are, six months later, he's
actually 14 points lower than
what he was.
He's not filling it up.
He's draining it even more.
And where it's draining
from, it's from independents.
And that's a danger point here,
not just for the president, but
really for members of Congress
who are up in 2018.
If you're a Republican, you
know your base is still behind
you, Democrats have never
been with you, but independents,
those are the folks,
especially for members who sit
in sort of swing type districts,
those are the people that
they can't afford to be losing
by this percentage that
the president's losing by.
If he only has a 30, 31
percent approval rating
among independents, it
makes it very difficult
for Republicans up in 2018.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Tam, we
know the Trump folks already
have their campaign committee
up and running for reelection.
How do they look at all this?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: It's not clear what
the campaign is actually doing
in terms of moving
toward reelection.
He's held some rallies.
President Trump tweeted over
the weekend that he thought it
wasn't really that bad, that
this poll wasn't so bad.
And, you know, the best thing
the president could do to
improve his approval rating -- I
guess there's probably two
things, one, maybe focus on some
of the people who didn't support
him in the beginning and
maybe try doing something,
anything that wouldn't
be seen as strictly
partisan.
And the other thing would be,
you know, like, start winning.
He has -- you know, he
promised you are going
to be so sick of winning.
But, you know, he hasn't
had the major legislative
accomplishments.
The health care bill has
gotten totally bogged down.
It was supposed to be
done maybe by April.
And that's something that
his base really wanted.
But he just has not
done a lot of things.
He did the executive orders
that the base liked, but that
turned off the independents
and others.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we even --
you and I were just -- we were
just talking a moment ago,
Amy, about when you ask people
even about impeachment, 41
percent in a Monmouth poll
support impeaching
the president.
And you were just saying, for
Richard Nixon at this point,
it was much less than that.
AMY WALTER: For Richard Nixon
going into the summary of 1973,
his overall approval rating
was basically where Donald
Trump's is right now.
The difference is the
intensity of the opposition
or the dislike of President
Nixon among partisans.
He had 25 percent approval
rating among Democrats,
Nixon did, in July of 1973.
President Trump has
about 8 percent approval
rating among Democrats.
So, the intensity of
opposition to the president
has always been an issue.
As Tam points out, he's
not getting the intensity
of support among his base.
And he made that decision
when he came into office.
Instead of trying to grow that
base, he had a very narrow
base of support, very narrow
support among all kinds of
voters, except for Republicans.
Instead of trying to grow it,
he's focused and doubled down
on the small group of people
who supported him all along.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Tam, you're
talking about ways where the
president could put some wins
on the board.
Health care reform is one of the
issues he has been focused on.
This was another question in
the Washington Post/ABC poll.
And this can't be
considered good news
for the administration.
People were asked what
they think about Obamacare
vs. the Republican plan.
By 2-1, they prefer Obamacare.
TAMARA KEITH: Which
is pretty remarkable.
Obamacare has seen -- you know,
it's having better days than
it ever had when President
Obama was president.
You know, I was out in Kentucky
last week talking to voters.
Just a few little anecdotes.
One woman I talked to supported
President Trump, doesn't
like Obamacare, but is deeply
concerned about the Republican
health care bill, in
particular the Medicaid cuts.
Another voter I talked
to basically said, why
the -- what's the rush?
Why are they hurrying?
Why don't they slow down
and do this together?
He was also a Republican.
And then one other Republican
I talked to said he didn't
really know what was in the
bill, but he was glad it got
rid of the individual mandate.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: That's the
big problem right now.
There is nobody
selling this bill.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
AMY WALTER: We're talking
a lot about process.
We're talking a lot about
members who are supporting
or not supporting it.
There is nobody out there
really championing this bill.
Even the president himself is
just sending out tweets saying,
I sure hope you guys vote
for it.
We have been saying we're
going to vote for it.
He's not going out.
He's not holding rallies.
I looked at the amount of money
that's been spent since the
end of May on ads that talk
about this health care bill;
$6 million have been spent so
far in advertising; 5.8 million
of those dollars have been
spent on negative attacks on the
health care or urging senators
to vote against it.
So, without a champion, it's
not surprising to me at all
that the health care bill that
Republicans are putting forward
isn't particularly popular.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's probably
similar to the ratio of what
was spent against Obamacare
when that was being debated.
But, Tam, this is -- with
the vote now delayed, the
opponents are worried.
I mean, the folks who don't want
this are saying it gives them
time to build up opposition,
more opposition.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely.
Mitch McConnell didn't
want to take a lot of time
to let this bill stew.
He wanted to hurry
and get a vote on it.
And there's a reason for that,
because the longer it just
hangs out there, the longer
people have to look at
the Congressional Budget
Office score, which is
not out just yet, but
the longer governors have
to put pressure on their
senators, the longer voters have
to call into their Senate
offices every single
day, the harder it gets
to make this happen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's always
easier to fight something
than it is to support it.
But, having said this, Amy,
your point about so much of
this has been done behind closed
doors.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
Well, and without --
again, without a real
champion supporting it.
But you're right.
This has not been
done with committees.
There hasn't been a whole lot of
public discussion or even within
Congress a whole lot of public
debate about this.
Tam is right.
McConnell wanted to get
this done, move on to
something like taxes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I promise
we won't talk about polls
again for a whole year.
Fingers crossed.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: I don't believe you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tam
and Amy, thank you.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As a candidate,
President Trump called for the
largest expansion of the Navy
since the Reagan administration,
but his latest budget proposal
contains more modest short-term
increases.
Still, it would boost business
in the U.S. shipbuilding
industry, which, despite serious
safety violations in the
past decade, continues
to win billions of
dollars in contracts to
build Navy and
Coast Guard vessels.
Aubrey Aden-Buie of Reveal, from
the Center for Investigative
Reporting, has the story.
JOHN WILLIAMS, Injured in
Accident: I love you, baby doll.
WANDA WILLIAMS, Wife of John
Williams: I love you, too.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE:
Wanda Williams' life
changed forever when her
sister-in-law rushed to her
house in 2014.
WANDA WILLIAMS: And she
got out of the car crying.
And she said that John got hurt
and he was hurt really bad.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Wanda's
husband, John, nearly died in an
accident at the shipyard where
he worked.
WANDA WILLIAMS: We would have
never thought that this would
have happened to him, because
this is things that he
did every single day.
He went to work as my husband,
and he came home as a child.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Wanda
now takes care of her
husband 24 hours a day.
The accident happened three
years ago at a VT Halter
Mississippi shipyard.
A surveillance camera recorded
as Williams' crane lost balance
and suddenly tipped over.
His co-worker, Willie
Horne, saw it happen.
WILLIE HORNE, Co-Worker: The
boom pulled back and it just
bounced back all kind of ways.
And he was just messed up.
His head was crushed.
That stuff like that, it's
just something that you
just can't forget like that.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: The
accident crushed Williams'
skull and left him blind.
For months before the accident,
he had complained about the
crane's broken load sensor.
VT Halter re-installed the
sensor two days earlier, but the
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, or OSHA,
later determined it
wasn't fully operational.
There is a history of serious
accidents at VT Halter.
A few years earlier, two
workers were killed applying
paint thinner inside a tugboat.
In this crawlspace, while
working with insufficient
ventilation and without
explosion-proof lights,
vapors built up over 600
times the legal limit,
igniting in a flash fire.
Joey Pettey barely
escaped the blast.
JOEY PETTEY, Accident Survivor:
The explosion, when it happened,
it blew doors and hatches
and electrical panels,
boom, boom, boom.
When that third one
hit, it blew it out.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: OSHA
investigated and called
that accident horrific
and preventable, and
fined the company over $800,000.
But a month following
the explosion, the Navy
awarded VT Halter the
contract to build this
ship, worth $87 million.
JOEY PETTEY: The contracts
are pretty hefty amounts,
and the fines is really low.
It seems like a slap on the
wrist when you got that kind
of money rolling around.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: We repeatedly
reached out to VT Halter,
but they declined to comment
or to be interviewed.
They're one of seven major
U.S. shipbuilders that contract
with the Navy and Coast Guard.
Our review of federal contracts,
court records, and OSHA files
found that, since 2008, the
federal government has awarded
more than $100 billion to these
companies, despite serious
safety lapses that have
endangered and killed workers.
In neighboring Mobile, Alabama,
Austal USA is building some
of the country's newest naval
vessels.
Huge aluminum modules are
assembled into warships on
the banks of the Mobile River.
But dozens of its workers have
been injured by a power tool
used to cut through metal.
Their own top safety manager
dubbed it the widow maker.
MARTIN OSBORN, Injured
in Accident: The day
of my accident, I was
using the miller, as
it is called at Austal.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Martin
Osborn is a welder at Austal.
MARTIN OSBORN: I was up in a
boom lift, as we call it, or a
man lift, up in the air about
40 feet, cutting a lifting
lug off the side of a module,
and had a violent kickback.
It kicked out of my hands
and went across my left
hand, cutting me pretty bad.
I didn't take my glove off,
because, I knew if I did that,
I would have blood everywhere.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Before
Osborn's accident, Austal
modified the Metabo
grinder by replacing
the standard disc with
a sawtooth blade made
by an outside company.
This made the tool more
versatile, able to cut
through aluminum more quickly.
But the manufacturer of
the grinder specifically
warned against using
these blades, saying
they cause frequent kickback
and loss of control.
MARTIN OSBORN: I have seen
pictures of people getting cut
in their face, in their necks,
in their thighs.
It's the most dangerous tool
I have ever put in my hands.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Does
Austal know that the tool
is as dangerous as it is?
MARTIN OSBORN: Yes,
ma'am, they do.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Company
e-mails among Austal's
managers obtained by
Reveal show that, even
before Osborn's accident, they
called the modification lethal,
and the grinders an accident
waiting to happen.
Yet, according to Osborn,
Austal workers still
use the grinder daily.
MARTIN OSBORN: I have
had numerous supervisors
tell me that, you
know, if you don't want
to use the tool, go get
a job at Burger King.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Despite
repeated requests,
Austal declined to
comment for this story.
The company has received
more than $6 billion in
Navy contracts since 2008.
But when OSHA concluded the saw
exposed workers to amputations,
severe lacerations, and other
injuries, they fined the
shipyard just over $4,000.
Austal's own records show at
least 50 workers were injured
by the tool in four years.
BRIAN DUNCAN, Attorney:
Why would any manufacturer
or any company continue
to use a tool after
dozens and dozens of
people have been injured?
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Attorney
Brian Duncan is representing
Osborn, along with eight others,
in a lawsuit which he
hopes will bring more
than just compensation.
BRIAN DUNCAN: I hope, when there
are companies out there that
have intentionally, knowingly
violated safety standards, that
somebody will come in, in that
scenario and will hold those
people accountable.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: David
Michaels, the head of OSHA under
former President Obama, was
until recently in charge of
enforcing workplace safety laws.
He acknowledges that
OSHA's maximum penalties
are insufficient,
capped by federal law.
DAVID MICHAELS, Former OSHA
Director: They're tiny compared
to the contracts that many of
these companies get
from the government and
from the private sector.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: He says
that the real power the
government holds is in
awarding the contracts
themselves.
DAVID MICHAELS: The biggest
fine is a million dollars,
two million dollars.
That is petty cash for these
companies that get $100 million,
$200 million, $300 million
contracts from the Defense
Department to build
ships that are protecting
the United States.
We need to be protecting
our workers as much as
protecting our shores.
MATTHEW PAXTON, President,
Shipbuilders Council of America:
I know Navy puts a high priority
on safety, as do our shipyards
that are building those ships.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: President
of the Shipbuilders
Council of America,
Matthew Paxton, says the
government does consider safety
records when awarding contracts.
MATTHEW PAXTON: I think they
take that into a whole lot of
considerations that they have
to figure out on
their contracting end.
And there's many requirements
that go into that beyond safety.
But safety's in there.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Yet,
the Navy's history of
awarding contracts to
companies with repeated
violations suggests that
it places little emphasis
on safety records.
NAVSEA, the Naval command
responsible for shipbuilding
contracts, declined an on-camera
interview, but a spokesperson
said in an e-mail that
it's up to OSHA, not
the Navy, to enforce
federal safety laws.
They added: "We are not
the overlords of private
shipyards when it comes
to workplace safety."
DAVID MICHAELS: The
Navy has the power.
They can easily say, if
workers are hurt, if you don't
follow the basic commonsense
safety rules, you don't
get any more contracts.
That would have a huge impact.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Former
President Obama signed
an executive order
that required companies
to disclose three years of
safety violations when vying
for large federal contracts.
But a federal court
blocked that order.
And, this spring, Congress
drafted a resolution to
overturn it altogether.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader: The regulations
aren't issued in a vacuum.
They have real economic
consequences that can
harm the middle class.
They can kill jobs, raise
prices, depress wages
and lower opportunities.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: President
Trump signed the resolution into
law, meaning companies don't
have to disclose their
safety records when
competing for contracts.
That same month, Senator
Elizabeth Warren asked
the Justice Department
to open a criminal
investigation into VT Halter.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN (D),
Massachusetts: We want
to get to the bottom
of why people have died
and what kind of responsibility
the company itself has.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: Warren wants
the Navy to scrutinize safety
records when granting contracts
to all shipbuilders.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: And in the
same way that they look at
how much is it going to cost,
they also need to look
at whether or not this is
a contractor who injures
and kills employees.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: At Austal's
shipyard, Martin Osborn still
frequently uses a sawtooth blade
like the one that
cost him his finger.
He says nothing will change
unless shipyards are made to
pay a price for putting workers
at risk.
MARTIN OSBORN: We're not
worried about if you get cut
or the next guy gets cut.
We just put another guy in your
place and move on down the road.
AUBREY ADEN-BUIE: For the
"PBS NewsHour," I'm Aubrey
Aden-Buie in Mobile, Alabama.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally,
remembering filmmaker
George Romero, the master
of the zombie movie
and a man whose influence
in the business went further
than many moviegoers realize.
Jeffrey Brown has our look.
ACTOR: Medical examination of
victims bodies show conclusively
that the killers are eating
the flesh of the
people they kill.
JEFFREY BROWN: With a $100,000
in 1968, George Romero brought
the undead back to life in
American culture.
His "Night of the Living
Dead" became a cult
classic, and launched a
modern zombie industry
of soulless ghouls with
a taste for human flesh
popping up everywhere today.
For Romero, his films were
about more than just blood
and graphic violence.
GEORGE ROMERO, Director:
This series of films have
been sort of my platform.
It's ripe for metaphor.
And the zombies, to me, have
always represented the people
that are just unwilling to stand
up.
And, you know, there are a
lot of living dead in America.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Night of the
Living Dead," starring an
African-American actor, was seen
as a kind of social
commentary on racism and the
paranoid mood of its time.
A decade later, Romero's
first sequel, "Dawn of
the Dead," played on
the excesses of American
consumerism.
Roger Ebert dubbed it one of
the best horror films ever
made, savagely merciless in its
satiric view.
Romero followed up with many
other films, including four
more in the "Dead" series,
with varying degrees
of box office success.
But the zombie world he
unleashed took on a massive
multibillion-dollar life of its
own in blockbuster films like
"World War Z," video games,
and AMC's "The Walking Dead."
That, in turn, led Romero
to sour a bit on the genre
he helped popularize.
He spoke on NPR in 2014.
GEORGE ROMERO: It's, all of
a sudden, you can't make a
little zombie film anymore.
Has to be special
effects and big budget.
And I'm not -- I'm just
not interested in that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Later in life,
he shifted to different media,
including teaming up with
Marvel to publish a
comic book series.
George Romero died Sunday
in Toronto from lung cancer.
He was 77 years old.
And for more on George Romero
and his impact, I'm joined by
Justin Chang, film critic for
The Los Angeles Times.
Welcome to you, Justin.
Zombies, who would have thought?
What explains the impact
of those early films?
JUSTIN CHANG, The Los Angeles
Times: Well, I think when you
have a film like "Night of
the Living Dead," which is, I
think, one of the great debut
films that any director in
or outside the horror genre
has ever given us, you have to
look at the context, you know,
Vietnam, Martin Luther
King Jr.'s assassination,
the recent assassinations
of the Kennedy brothers.
It was a time of, obviously,
great social unrest.
And George Romero found,
unwittingly or not, a perfect
metaphor for that unrest.
And I think it was about the
primitiveness of the filmmaking,
the very raw technique.
It was shot on a $114,000
budget, which is about
$800,000 today, still
a very small budget.
And he achieved this kind
of -- a film that was almost
like a documentary nightmare.
And it really captured,
I think, a sense of rage
and of pointlessness,
a kind of senseless,
arbitrary killing that
was really unsettling for
audiences at the time,
and is still enormously
unsettling today.
JEFFREY BROWN: His films, of
course, largely done on the
cheap, but somehow a cult thing
grew into a very large
cultural phenomenon.
He wasn't so crazy -- as
we heard, he wasn't so
crazy about what followed?
JUSTIN CHANG: Absolutely.
I mean, we live in a culture
where zombies are proliferating
on screens, whether it's
"World War Z" or "The Walking
Dead," which is still hugely
popular, or the remake of
"Dawn of the Dead" about 13
years ago, and terrific spoofs
like "Shaun of the Dead,"
which I think is one of the
few that George Romero has
professed to actually liking.
So, in a way, he was, I think,
understandably disenchanted with
the way that Hollywood really
mainstreamed the zombie film and
the zombie TV show, and in some
ways took out that edginess,
that political subtext that he
was so good at putting in there.
And I think he especially
resented things like
"The Walking Dead,"
because it made it
very difficult for him to get
his own zombie movies financed
on an independent level.
And he was a consummate
independent filmmaker,
and something of a
Hollywood outsider and
skeptic, I think, all his
career, which makes his success
all the more remarkable.
JEFFREY BROWN: For a lot of
people, this stuff goes way too
far, right, the graphic violence
that's part of our society
and that's really part of
our entertainment culture.
Did he help create that,
for better or for worse?
JUSTIN CHANG: I don't think
it's entirely fair to lay that
as George Romero's doorstep.
And I say that as someone who's
on the more squeamish side of
the spectrum as far as horror
movie viewers goes.
But I think you have to look
at his films, a film like
"Dawn of the Dead," which is,
I think, as great a
masterpiece as "Night
of the Living Dead" is.
There is always something more
going on beneath the violence.
If you're just there
for the splatter and the
viscera, you will get that.
But he gives you -- he's
always asking you to look a
little closer, see what's going
on, see who these zombies
represent, see who the
real monsters are in a way.
And so I don't think
it's entirely fair to
say that he's responsible
for the fetishization
and exploitation of
violence in our culture.
He's using it -- I mean, he's
exploiting violence in his own
way, to very brilliant and very
provocative ends.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just briefly, I
do want to mention the passing
of another movie figure,
the actor Martin Landau.
He was known early on, on
television, in "Mission:
Impossible," later in
films, including "Ed
Wood," for which he won an
Oscar for best supporting actor.
Let's take a look at a short
scene from Woody Allen's 1989
film "Crimes and Misdemeanors."
MARTIN LANDAU, Actor: This
is what you plan on doing.
You're going to hold on
to me with threats, right,
stupid threats and slander?
This is your idea
of love, right?
ACTRESS: I will
not be tossed out.
I want to speak to Miriam.
MARTIN LANDAU: Think.
For Christ's sake, think
what the hell you are
doing to me, will you?
Please.
JEFFREY BROWN: Justin Chang, a
brief thought on Martin Landau?
JUSTIN CHANG: Martin Landau
was such a wonderful actor.
And that scene you play sort of,
I think, captures his elegance
and gravitas, his ability
to play a silken villain
that we feel for.
In that film, he's an adulterous
husband who contemplates
the murder of his lover.
And it's -- you know, I'm
reminded, too, of his great
performance many decades earlier
in Alfred Hitchcock's "North
By Northwest," where he took
the role of a villain's number
two and made it something
really memorable and really
incisive out of that.
And so it's not that he could
only play villains, certainly
not, but he had, I think, a real
talent for playing morally
ambiguous characters,
and doing it superbly.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Justin Chang of The Los Angeles
Times, thank you very much.
JUSTIN CHANG: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
we thank you, Jeff.
And I was covering my eyes
until we got to Martin Landau.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.